---
title: Revised Writing Reflection
sort: 3
depth: 2
layout: portfolio
---

Reflection on Scarlet-Crucible and Semester 1 Final Essay
---------------------------------------------------------

The very first thing I noticed about these essays was that my handwritten
essays are significantly shorter than my essays which start their life out
typed. Perhaps this is because I have the ability to add elaborations in later
on things, but I think it's most significantly because my handwriting is big, I
write slower than I can type, and I focus too much on writing "enough." For the
first draft, I think both of these essays could have benefitted from more time
thinking about how the essay was organized and laid out. The connections
between the sections weren't always as strong as I feel they should have been,
and it's very difficult to improve that later without rewriting the entire
essay from scratch. I think I can improve the structure of my essays by simply
reading essays that are written by more competent and enthusiastic essayists.

For the Semester Final essay, I feel that it very strong work for me already in
draft form, so the majority of my revision went into improving the wording in a
way that's rather difficult to do when you're writing it on paper. For
instance, I restructured the first sentence to be more understandable. The
draft version contains "to others," in a context where I don't actually appear
to be comparing anyone's opinions, and so that was removed. I also reordered
some of the clauses in the sentence to read more fluently. In addition to
general readability improvements in the Final essay, I had many small single
word improvements, doing things like adding "ideal" at the end of the first
paragraph to emphasize that it is a theoretical society rather than the society
that Thoreau lived in, since later on I use constructs like "Hester's Society"
to refer to the society that she lives in.

For "The Responsibility of Redemption in The Crucible and The Scarlet Letter,"
I mostly added more evidence in places that needed it, since I had plenty of
time to polish the wording in the first draft. (That's not to say that I didn't
improve the wording anywhere, it just wasn't as commonly necessary.) In the
second paragraph where I describe Hester being released from her obligation to
Chillingworth, I added a description of how he basically just rejects her,
strengthening the viewpoint that she doesn't feel guilty towards him anymore.
He doesn't want her anymore. Also significantly, I added the emphasis that was
almost entirely lacking about Dimmesdale's confession at the end of the fourth
paragraph, describing how he is suddenly energetic and about how acute his
suffering was for 7 years. Plus, the awesome quote: "with a flush of triumph in
his face, as one who, in the crisis of acutest pain, had won a victory."

For the Final paper, even though I didn't use the very best organization, I'm
still pretty proud of how coherent it is, especially for a paper that was
written on the spot with a relatively limited note card. I also use lots of
strong quotes in this paper, and I think I tie them in really well, so that's
the best part of this essay. For the Scarlet-Crucible paper I'm most proud of
how I juggle several different threads of topics. I'm explaining how a central
topic relates to three separate characters in two separate books, and I manage
to keep the points that I'm making about them all relatively coherently tied
together. It also sounds like a fancy pants essay at many parts, which might
not be a good thing in general (although it's probably good for ACT writing
scores), but I still really like it.

One new thing I've learned about my writing is that I should stop using so many
freaking em-dashes! Looking back at the first paper it's frankly a bit
ridiculous. I've gotten much better about knowing where to put them, so future
papers shouldn't apply them quite as radically ---  I still like them too much
though.

Finally, one thing that I distinctly remember from the process on the
Scarlet-Crucible essay was that I left off the locations of my quotes while I
was gathering evidence, so I didn't actually have the in-text citations added
until after I finished. I had to do a second pass over my paper looking at all
the quotes, finding them in the book, and then adding the in-text citations. In
the future, I need to remember to start on the citations early --- this isn't
just for English papers either, I frequently wait to fix up the in-text
citations on other papers, and I need to get better at that.